Add `0.3` release blog post (#507)
tokio-rs/website: content/blog/2020-10-tokio-0-3.md

# Plan for 1.0

The Tokio team plans to release Tokio 1.0 at the end of Q4 2020. We intend to use Tokio 0.3 for several months, resolve any issues that emerge, and release Tokio 1.0. To do this, we ask that *you*, the Tokio community, try out Tokio 0.3 and give us feedback through [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/issues) or our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/tokio). Once we release Tokio 1.0, we will commit to the following stability guarantees:

1. A minimum of 5 years of maintenance.
2. A minimum of 3 years before a hypothetical 2.0 release.

Sometime after the release of Tokio 1.0, we will introduce a minimum supported Rust version (MSRV) policy where we plan to support the last six months of stable Rust releases. We are delaying the introduction of this MSRV policy to accommodate the inclusion of the `Stream` trait in the standard library.

# What’s new?

The main changes in Tokio 0.3 are:

1. Changes to IO traits.
2. New runtime builder.
3. Many methods changed from `&mut self` to `&self`.
4. Removal of non-1.0 crates from the public API

You can find the full list on the [changelog](TODO LINK).

## Changes to IO traits

> This release of Tokio contains changes to the `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` traits that allow them to properly handle uninitialized memory. This change is motivated by an RFC to Rust: \[Reading into uninitialized buffers\](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2930). Note that this change *only* affects users who implement the `AsyncRead` or `AsyncWrite` traits or manually calling the `poll_*` methods. If the traits are consumed through the `AsyncReadExt` or `AsyncWriteExt` traits, users will not have to change anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release of Tokio contains changes to the `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` traits that allow them to properly handle uninitialized memory. This change is motivated by an RFC to Rust: [Reading into uninitialized buffers](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2930). Note that this change *only* affects users who implement the `AsyncRead` or `AsyncWrite` traits or manually calling the `poll_*` methods. If the traits are consumed through the `AsyncReadExt` or `AsyncWriteExt` traits, users will not have to change anything.
```

A simplified version of the new `AsyncRead` trait looks like this:

```rust
pub trait AsyncRead {
    fn poll_read(
        self: Pin<&mut Self>, 
        cx: &mut Context<'_>, 
        buf: &mut ReadBuf<'_>
    ) -> Poll<Result<()>>;
}

pub struct ReadBuf<'a> {
    buf: &'a mut [MaybeUninit<u8>],
    filled: usize,
    initialized: usize,
}

impl<'a> ReadBuf<'a> {
    // functions here, see RFC
}
```

The traditional `&mut [u8]` argument to the `poll_read` method has some unintended sharp edges: an implementer, not the end consumer, of the `AsyncRead` trait can *read* the data stored in the `&mut [u8]` slice. This means that if a programmer creates a mutable slice of bytes (a `&mut [u8]`) that references uninitialized memory (e.g., the excess capacity in a vector), *reading* the `&mut [u8]` data would cause undefined behavior. We mitigate this issue by providing a `ReadBuf` struct that tracks what memory is properly initialized and removing the need to constantly initialize (e.g., zero-out) memory.

Additionally, the `poll_read_buf` and `poll_write_buf` methods are removed from both traits.

## Feature flag simplification

> We have reduce the amount of feature flags needed to use the core features of Tokio. This includes collpasing `tcp`, `udp`,  and `uds` into a single `net` feature flag. We have also removed `rt-util` and merged both what was under `rt-util` and `rt-core` into a new `rt` feature flag. This `rt` feature flag no encompasses everything to execute futures except for the multi threaded runtime which now lives under a `rt-multi-thread` feature flag (previously was called `rt-threaded`).

Reviewer: Didn't we merge `dns` with `net` too?
```suggestion
We have reduced the amount of feature flags needed to use the core features of Tokio. This includes collpasing `tcp`, `udp`,  and `uds` into a single `net` feature flag. We have also removed `rt-util` and merged both what was under `rt-util` and `rt-core` into a new `rt` feature flag. This `rt` feature flag now encompasses everything to execute futures except for the multi threaded runtime which now lives under a `rt-multi-thread` feature flag (previously was called `rt-threaded`).
```

Author: Yeah will update that, good catch

> - `tcp`, `udp` and `uds` -> `net`

Reviewer: dns?

- `rt-util` and `rt-core` -> `rt`
- `rt-threaded` -> `rt-multi-threaded`

## Runtime and Builder refactor

> The Tokio team has removed  `threaded_scheduler` and `basic_scheduler` from the public API. Instead, the runtime `Builder` type introduces two constructors: one constructor for a mutli threaded scheduler and one for a current thread scheduler. These constructors provide a misuse-resistant form of building a runtime that *does not* require fiddling with feature flags and build methods. Tokio will no longer choose the runtime variant based on feature flags when using `Runtime::new` but instead will default to the multi threaded runtime and is only available under the `rt` feature flag. In addition, we’ve renamed the `core_threads` builder method to the more accurate `worker_threads`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tokio team has removed  `threaded_scheduler` and `basic_scheduler` from the public API. Instead, the runtime `Builder` type introduces two constructors: one constructor for a multi threaded scheduler and one for a current thread scheduler. These constructors provide a misuse-resistant form of building a runtime that *does not* require fiddling with feature flags and build methods. Tokio will no longer choose the runtime variant based on feature flags when using `Runtime::new` but instead will default to the multi threaded runtime and is only available under the `rt` feature flag. In addition, we’ve renamed the `core_threads` builder method to the more accurate `worker_threads`. 
```

> We also have refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: the `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, wheras `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed Runtime and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. Tokio 0.3’s `Runtime`‘s `block_on` now accepts `&self`, which supports concurrent calls to `block_on`. This also means `Runtime` implements `Send`/`Sync` and can therefore be stored in an `Arc`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have also refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, whereas `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed Runtime and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. Tokio 0.3’s `Runtime`‘s `block_on` now accepts `&self`, which supports concurrent calls to `block_on`. This also means `Runtime` implements `Send` and `Sync`, and can therefore be stored in an `Arc`.
```

1. A minimum of 5 years of maintenance.
2. A minimum of 3 years before a hypothetical 2.0 release.

## What’s new?

The main changes in Tokio 0.3 are:

1. Changes to IO traits.
2. New runtime builder.
3. The I/O driver is overhauled
4. The API is future proofed.

You can find the full list on the [changelog](TODO LINK).

## Changes to IO traits

Following the lead of @sfackler’s [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2930), we changed the `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` traits to support reading into uninitialized memory. This change *only* affects users who implement the `AsyncRead` or `AsyncWrite` traits or manually calling the `poll_*` methods. If the `AsyncReadExt` or `AsyncWriteExt` traits are used, no change is required.

Below is a simplified version of the new `AsyncRead`:

```rust
pub trait AsyncRead {
    fn poll_read(
        self: Pin<&mut Self>, 
        cx: &mut Context<'_>, 
        buf: &mut ReadBuf<'_>
    ) -> Poll<Result<()>>;
}

pub struct ReadBuf<'a> {
    buf: &'a mut [MaybeUninit<u8>],
    filled: usize,
    initialized: usize,
}

impl<'a> ReadBuf<'a> {
    // functions here, see RFC
}
```

> The `&mut [u8]` argument to the Tokio 0.2’s `poll_read` method has some unintended sharp edges: an implementer, not the end consumer, of the `AsyncRead` trait can *read* the data stored in the `&mut [u8]` slice. If a programmer creates a mutable slice of bytes (a `&mut [u8]`) that references uninitialized memory (e.g., the excess capacity in a vector), then *reading* the `&mut [u8]` data would cause undefined behavior. The new design mitigates this issue by providing a `ReadBuf` struct that tracks the uninitialized memory, removing the need to initialize memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `&mut [u8]` argument to Tokio 0.2’s `poll_read` method has some unintended sharp edges: an implementer, not the end consumer, of the `AsyncRead` trait can *read* the data stored in the `&mut [u8]` slice. If a programmer creates a mutable slice of bytes (a `&mut [u8]`) that references uninitialized memory (e.g., the excess capacity in a vector), then *reading* the `&mut [u8]` data would cause undefined behavior. The new design mitigates this issue by providing a `ReadBuf` struct that tracks the uninitialized memory, removing the need to initialize memory.
```

> Additionally, the `poll_read_buf` and `poll_write_buf` methods have been removed from both traits. In practice, these methods were rarely implemented. Vectored operations will be implemented by types that support them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `poll_read_buf` and `poll_write_buf` methods have been removed from both traits. In practice, these methods were rarely implemented. Vectored operations will be implemented directly on types that support them.
```

## Feature flag simplification

> We have reduced the amount of feature flags needed to use the core features of Tokio. The `dns`, `tcp`, `udp`,  and `uds` feature flags are collapsed into a single `net` feature flag. We have also combined `rt-core` and `rt-util` into a single `rt` feature flag. This `rt` feature flag now encompasses everything to execute futures except for the multi-threaded runtime which now lives under a `rt-multi-thread` feature flag (previously was called `rt-threaded`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have reduced the amount of feature flags needed to use the core features of Tokio. The `dns`, `tcp`, `udp`,  and `uds` feature flags are collapsed into a single `net` feature flag. We have also combined `rt-core` and `rt-util` into a single `rt` feature flag. This `rt` feature flag now encompasses everything needed to execute futures except for the multi-threaded runtime, which now lives under a `rt-multi-thread` feature flag (was called `rt-threaded` in 0.2).
```

- `dns`, tcp`, `udp` and `uds` -> `net`
- `rt-util` and `rt-core` -> `rt`

> - `rt-threaded` -> `rt-multi-threaded`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rt-threaded` -> `rt-multi-thread`
```

## Runtime and Builder refactor

> The Tokio team has improved the runtime `Builder` to provide better consistency accross feature flag permutations and to be more mis-use resistant. To achieve this, we have added two new constructors to the `Builder` type to support building both variations of the Tokio runtime. Additionally, Tokio will no longer choose the runtime variant based on feature flags when using `Runtime::new` but instead will default to the multi-threaded runtime and is only available under the `rt` feature flag. In addition, we’ve renamed the `core_threads` builder method to the more accurate `worker_threads`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tokio team has improved the runtime `Builder` to provide better consistency accross feature flag permutations and to be more mis-use resistant. To achieve this, we have added two new constructors to the `Builder` type to support building both variations of the Tokio runtime. Additionally, Tokio will no longer choose the runtime variant based on feature flags when using `Runtime::new`, but will instead always use the multi-threaded runtime, which is only available under the `rt-multi-thread` feature flag. In addition, we’ve renamed the `core_threads` builder method to the more accurate `worker_threads`.
```

> We have also refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, whereas `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed `Runtime` and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. Tokio 0.3’s `Runtime`‘s `block_on` now accepts `&self`, which supports concurrent calls to `block_on`. This also means `Runtime` implements `Send` and `Sync` and can therefore be stored in an `Arc`.

Reviewer: The runtime has always been `Send + Sync`.
```suggestion
We have also refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, whereas `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed `Runtime` and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. The `block_on` method on the new runtime takes `&self`, which means that it can be put in an `Arc` without problems.
```

An example configuring a multi-threaded runtime with 6 worker threads:

```rust
use tokio::runtime::Builder;

let rt = Builder::new_multi_thread()
    .worker_threads(6)
    .enable_all()
    .build()
    .unwrap();

rt.block_on(async {
    println!("Hello world!");
});
```

## Methods changed to `&self`

> We have overhauled how we handle wakers within our socket types to allow concurrent calls via `&self` rather than `&mut self`. To achieve this we had to rewrite how we handle wakers internally. The problem comes with how `poll_*` based methods work. Under the futures contract it states that a `poll_*` fn should only store the _last_ waker that it was called with. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have overhauled how we handle wakers within our socket types to allow concurrent calls via `&self` rather than `&mut self`. To achieve this, we had to rewrite how we handle wakers internally. The problem comes with how `poll_*` based methods work. Under the futures contract it states that a `poll_*` fn should only store the _last_ waker that it was called with.
```

> Note that on multiple calls to poll, only the Waker from the Context passed to the most recent call should be scheduled to receive a wakeup.

From [`Future`](doc.rust-lang.org/std/future/trait.Future.html)

> This means that these `poll_*` can not be called from or woken concurrently. To make `&self` work for our `async fn` on our sockets types we refactored our io driver to use an internal instrusive linked-list to store the wakers. By doing this, it allows our socket types to accept `&self` rather than` &mut self` calls. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that these `poll_*` methods cannot be called or woken concurrently. To make `&self` work for our `async fn` on our sockets types, we refactored our io driver to use an internal instrusive linked-list to store the wakers. By doing this, our socket types can accept `&self` rather than` &mut self` when called. 
```

## Romoval of non-1.0 crates and future proofing for 1.0

In our push for 1.0 we have removed many non-1.0 dependencies from the public API. This includes `bytes` and `mio`. This will allow us to push for a future proof and more stable 1.0 while we continue to innovate in our low-level crates.

## Mio 0.7

> We have finally also upgraded `mio` to 0.7 which was originally released in an alpha in December of 2019 and did not make the cut for Tokio 0.2. Since then `mio` 0.7 has had time to mature and is finally making it into this release of Tokio 0.3. This upgrades some key dependencies like `winapi` from 0.2 to 0.3. Additionally, `mio` 0.7 now comes with a pure-rust implementation of [`wepoll`](https://github.com/piscisaureus/wepoll) which is a library that implements the `epoll` API for Windows based applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have finally also upgraded `mio` to 0.7, which was originally released in an alpha in December of 2019 and did not make the cut for Tokio 0.2. Since then `mio` 0.7 has had time to mature and is finally making it into this release of Tokio 0.3. This upgrades some key dependencies like `winapi` from 0.2 to 0.3. Additionally, `mio` 0.7 now comes with a pure-rust implementation of [`wepoll`](https://github.com/piscisaureus/wepoll) which is a library that implements the `epoll` API for Windows based applications.
```

## Compat between 0.2 and 0.3

> It is possible to upgrade to Tokio 0.3 incrementally via the [`tokio-compat-02`](https://docs.rs/tokio-compat-02) crate. This crate will spin up a single threaded background runtime from Tokio 0.2 and will allow you to wrap any future in its context. This will then allow you to run libraries that require Tokio 0.2 alongside any runtime, including Tokio 0.3. Below is an example of how you can send a request using `hyper` 0.13 which requires Tokio 0.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to upgrade to Tokio 0.3 incrementally via the [`tokio-compat-02`](https://docs.rs/tokio-compat-02) crate. This crate will spin up a single threaded background runtime from Tokio 0.2 and will allow you to wrap any future in its context. This will then allow you to run libraries that require Tokio 0.2 inside any runtime, including Tokio 0.3. Below is an example of how you can send a request using `hyper` 0.13, which requires Tokio 0.2.
```

---
date: "2020-10-14"
title: "Announcing Tokio 0.3 and the path to 1.0"
description: "October 14, 2020"
---

> The Tokio team is excited to announce the release of Tokio 0.3, which is our beta release towards Tokio 1.0. The release fixes rough edges in the API discovered by customers using 0.2 and provides an opportunity for validating the changes before stabilizing them as part of 1.0. As most of these issues were small, we expect that upgrading from 0.2 to 0.3 will be easy.

Reviewer 2: The word customers here seems a bit surprising, maybe use `users` instead?

```suggestion
The Tokio team is excited to announce the release of Tokio 0.3, which is our beta release towards Tokio 1.0. The release fixes rough edges in the API discovered by users using 0.2 and provides an opportunity for validating the changes before stabilizing them as part of 1.0. As most of these issues were small, we expect that upgrading from 0.2 to 0.3 will be easy.
```

## Plan for 1.0

The Tokio team plans to release Tokio 1.0 by the end of December 2020. This date is fast approaching. We ask that *you*, the Tokio community, try out Tokio 0.3 and give us feedback through [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/issues) or our [Discord channel](https://discord.gg/tokio). Once we release Tokio 1.0, we will commit to the following stability guarantees:

1. A minimum of 5 years of maintenance.
2. A minimum of 3 years before a hypothetical 2.0 release.

## What’s new?

The main changes in Tokio 0.3 are:

1. Changes to IO traits.
2. New runtime builder.
3. The I/O driver is overhauled
4. The API is future proofed.

> You can find the full list on the [changelog](TODO LINK).

Reviewer 3: This will be the github release: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/releases/tag/tokio-0.3.0

## Changes to IO traits

> Following the lead of @sfackler’s [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2930), we changed the `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` traits to support reads into uninitialized memory. This change *only* affects users who implement the `AsyncRead` or `AsyncWrite` traits or manually calling the `poll_*` methods. If the `AsyncReadExt` or `AsyncWriteExt` traits are used, no change is required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Following the lead of @sfackler’s [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2930), we changed the `AsyncRead` and `AsyncWrite` traits to support reading into uninitialized memory. This change *only* affects users who implement the `AsyncRead` or `AsyncWrite` traits or manually calling the `poll_*` methods. If the `AsyncReadExt` or `AsyncWriteExt` traits are used, no change is required.
```

Additionally, the `poll_read_buf` and `poll_write_buf` methods have been removed from both traits. In practice, these methods were rarely implemented. Vectored operations will be implemented by types that support them.

## Feature flag simplification

We have reduced the amount of feature flags needed to use the core features of Tokio. The `dns`, `tcp`, `udp`,  and `uds` feature flags are collapsed into a single `net` feature flag. We have also combined `rt-core` and `rt-util` into a single `rt` feature flag. This `rt` feature flag now encompasses everything to execute futures except for the multi-threaded runtime which now lives under a `rt-multi-thread` feature flag (previously was called `rt-threaded`).

- `dns`, tcp`, `udp` and `uds` -> `net`
- `rt-util` and `rt-core` -> `rt`
- `rt-threaded` -> `rt-multi-threaded`

## Runtime and Builder refactor

> The Tokio team has removed  `threaded_scheduler` and `basic_scheduler` from the public API. Instead, the runtime `Builder` type introduces two constructors: one constructor for a multi-threaded scheduler and one for a current thread scheduler. These constructors provide a misuse-resistant form of building a runtime that *does not* require fiddling with feature flags and builder methods. Tokio will no longer choose the runtime variant based on feature flags when using `Runtime::new` but instead will default to the multi-threaded runtime and is only available under the `rt` feature flag. In addition, we’ve renamed the `core_threads` builder method to the more accurate `worker_threads`. 

Reviewer 3: ~~The Tokio team has removed  `threaded_scheduler` and `basic_scheduler` from the public API. Instead, ~~

This isn't important and can just be removed.

> These constructors provide a misuse-resistant form of building a runtime that *does not* require fiddling with feature flags and builder methods. 

I'm not following this.... maybe say something like:

"The new builder API provides consistency across feature flag permutations"

> We have also refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, whereas `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed Runtime and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. Tokio 0.3’s `Runtime`‘s `block_on` now accepts `&self`, which supports concurrent calls to `block_on`. This also means `Runtime` implements `Send` and `Sync` and can therefore be stored in an `Arc`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have also refactored the runtime module. Tokio 0.2 exposed two types to interact with the Tokio runtime: `Runtime` and `Handle`. `Runtime` has a `block_on` method that required `&mut self`, whereas `Handle` has a `block_on` method that required `&self`. With Tokio 0.3, we collapsed `Runtime` and `Handle` into a single `Runtime`. Tokio 0.3’s `Runtime`‘s `block_on` now accepts `&self`, which supports concurrent calls to `block_on`. This also means `Runtime` implements `Send` and `Sync` and can therefore be stored in an `Arc`.
```

An example configuring a multi-threaded runtime with 6 worker threads:

```rust
use tokio::runtime::Builder;

let rt = Builder::new_multi_thread()
    .worker_threads(6)
    .enable_all()
    .build()
    .unwrap();

rt.block_on(async {
    println!("Hello world!");
});
```

> ## Methods changed to `&self`

Reviewer 3: We should elaborate more on this. First, we should call out that the `&self` methods are for sockets, so maybe "Send and receive from a socket with `&self`. We should say it took an overhaul of the I/O driver. We should also explain why the trivial option doesn't work.

The problem comes w/ `poll_*` methods are supposed to only store the waker for the **last** call to `poll`. That doesn't support concurrent tasks calling.

> Note that on multiple calls to poll, only the Waker from the Context passed to the most recent call should be scheduled to receive a wakeup.

https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/future/trait.Future.html

To make `&self` methods work, we had to restructure everything w/ intrusive wakers.

We have updated our io types to use an intrusive linked list for storing the wakers. This has allowed us to change many of the methods on types like `TcpStream` and `UdpSocket` to merely take `&self`. This makes it easier to work with our io types across tasks.

> ## Removal of non-1.0 crates from the public API

Reviewer 3: Future proof apis.

In our push for 1.0 we have removed many non-1.0 dependencies from the public API. This includes `bytes` and `mio`. This will allow us to push for a simpler and more stable 1.0 while we continue to innovate in our low-level crates.

## Mio 0.7

> We have finally also upgraded `mio` to 0.7 which was originally released in an alpha in December of 2019 and did not make the cut for Tokio 0.2. Since, then `mio` 0.7 has had time to mature and is finally making it into this release of Tokio 0.3. This upgrades some key dependencies like `winapi` from 0.2 to 0.3.

Reviewer 3: It's worth noting that Mio 0.7 uses a pure-rust implementation of [wepoll](https://github.com/piscisaureus/wepoll).

> We have finally also upgraded `mio` to 0.7 which was originally released in an alpha in December of 2019 and did not make the cut for Tokio 0.2. Since, then `mio` 0.7 has had time to mature and is finally making it into this release of Tokio 0.3. This upgrades some key dependencies like `winapi` from 0.2 to 0.3.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have finally also upgraded `mio` to 0.7 which was originally released in an alpha in December of 2019 and did not make the cut for Tokio 0.2. Since then `mio` 0.7 has had time to mature and is finally making it into this release of Tokio 0.3. This upgrades some key dependencies like `winapi` from 0.2 to 0.3.
```
